# Graphic Elements

These are some graphic files that are not for a specific watch or anything, but which I think might have some usefulness in a general way.  I'm mostly talking about geometric shapes or gradients that can be turned and scaled and messed-with to provide some things that WM doesn't make easy to do (like, say, a solid square with a transparent circular hole in the middle).  So far, they're all monochromatic, white, so that you can tint them whatever color you need.

* [An alpha gradient](AlphaGradient.png): a linear gradient of transparency, from fully transparent at the bottom to fully opaque (white) at the top.  Most of the files here are 600x600 pixels, which I figure is a handy size, a little larger than the nominal size of the screen.
* [Alpha gradient and more](AlphaGradientPlusBorders.png): the same gradient as above, but extended with another whole square of opaque white at the top and full transparency at the bottom (so this one is 600x1800 pixels).
* [Circular hole](BigHole.png): a white square with as large a transparent circular "hole" in it as will fit.  That is, a "hole" that fills nearly the whole square, leaving opaque bits in the corners.
* [Circular hole with room around it](SmallHole.png): this one is 1024x1024 pixels, with the same 512x512 hole as above cut out of the center of it, so it has big areas of opaque outside the hole instead of just corners.
* [Half a circle](HalfCirc.png): a square with a *half*-circular hole cut out of it, the left side of the square being the diameter of the semicircle.  This half-circle hole is a shape I've actually used in watches, to make shadows on globes in the shape of the day and night halves.  You can make a gibbous shadow with a black semicircle and a squished black semicircle, but you can't make a gibbous *light* without having a semicircular hole.
* [Square hole](SquareHole.png): an opaque square with a transparent square "hole" half its length and width in the center.
* [Cross](Cross.png): a square with the middle third (horizontal and vertical) removed, leaving a big transparent cross.  You could construct this out of squares in WM, but it might be useful to have.
* [Cropped cross](CroppedCross.png): maybe not so useful: a square with a small transparent + carved out of the center.
* [Radial alpha gradient (in)](RadialGradientIn.png): a gradient of the alpha channel arranged radially, fully transparent at the center and fully opaque at the edges (and in the corners, as they are farther away from the center than the edges)
* [Radial alpha gradient (out)](RadialGradientOut.png): same as above, only reversed: fully opaque in the center shading to fully transparent at the edge.
* [A Right Triangle](RightTriangle.png): I haven't used this, but I had an application where I wished I had it.  It's a square divided in half diagonally, one half shaded.  You could sorta make it with a 50% Progress shader on a square at a 45° angle, but I found that those shaders interact badly with the skew\_x and skew\_y attributes, which I was using heavily.
* [A ring](Ring-125.png): a circular ring, a thin line that goes in a circle and doesn't touch the edges of the square.  Because of that extra buffer, if you want the ring to be 100 pixels wide, you should scale the picture to 125 pixels, i.e. 25% larger.
* [Thinner ring](Ring-cut.png): another circular ring, with a thinner line, that goes all the way to the edges of the square.  But because of that, the line is thinned at the top/bottom/left/right because it's halfway "off the paper" so to speak.
